hello good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street press conference for
months now our lives have been on hold
when the call came in March we pressed
pause on many of the things that
brighten our lives meals with friends
trips to the cinema or theater we had to
close out gyms and swimming pools cancel
our holidays and postpone some of our
favorite events but as we've made huge
progress against this disease we've
gradually seen the things we love
returned and today I'm very pleased to
announce that we can go a little bit
further as of this weekend our artists
musicians and dancers can start
performing live outside to outdoor
audiences we'll also have the resumption
of recreational sport followed later by
the reopening of our gyms swimming pools
and leisure centres normal life is
slowly returning this is an important
milestone for our performing artists who
have been waiting patiently in the wings
since March of course we won't see
crowds flooding into their venues but
from the 11th of July our theatres
operas dance and music shows can start
putting on outdoor performances to
socially distant audiences that means
theatre goers can experience a live play
for the first time and in months and
places like the stunning minyak Theatre
in Cornwall and music lovers can attend
blind born this summer we are taking
various measures to make these places
safe as they reopen their new capacity
will be reduced and organizations
encouraged to move to electronic
ticketing to help test and trace but our
performing artists deserve an audience
and now they will be getting one and
while those outdoor performances get
underway we'll be working with public
health experts to carefully pilot a
number of indoor performances from the
London Symphony Orchestra Edison Luke's
to Buckland's to work out how we can
confidently usher socially distance
audiences indoors as soon as possible at
the same time with funding scientific
studies to help us
understand and mitigate some specific
public health risks like the impact of
singing wind and brass instruments on
transmission the more we know about the
coronavirus in every setting the safer
we will be we're also taking steps
through the planning system to protect
theaters and venues from demolition or
change of use and of course all of this
comes on top of the unprecedented 1.5 7
billion pound package of emergency
support to help arts heritage and
cultural institutions whether the kovetz
storm but of course we want to see all
of our venues open as soon as it's safe
to do so and today's announcement brings
us a further step closer towards that
reality now having allowed hairdressers
to reopen beauticians tattooist sparse
tanning salons and other close contact
services can now do the same I'm pleased
to say from Monday of course that will
be subject to some restrictions on
particularly high risk services as I've
seen for myself at the Royal Academy
this morning the National Gallery and as
we'll see shortly from the National
Museums Liverpool our cultural
institutions are beginning also to
welcome back visitors and as these
places begin to reopen their doors I'm
really urging people to get out there
and to play their part buy the tickets
for outdoor plays and music recitals get
to your local gallery and support your
local businesses and we've seen in
recent weeks how our landlords waiters
and shop assistants have welcomed
customers back with open arms whilst
doing so much to keep their community
safe it's time to give other businesses
those same opportunities and the
Chancellor this week set out a bumper
package of tourism and hospitality tax
breaks to get these industries firing on
all cylinders once more and protect the
millions of people who work for them
that means a VAT cut on everything from
tickets to shows theaters amusement
parks museums and zoos lower costs for
hotels Inns caravans and campsites and
vouchers for food and non-alcoholic
drinks and I'm urging British people
to make the most of this summer safely
we need them to support the places that
we all love and today there is good news
for our nation's fitness as we all know
exercise is incredibly important for
both physical and mental health even at
the height of the lockdown it was
considered an essential activity with
countless people hitting their pots
their daily run or transforming their
living rooms into temporary gyms and
from this weekend onwards millions of
people will be able to rejoin their
local sports teams as soon as their
organizations publish approved guidance
recreational cricket is back on this
weekend fiber side football basketball
hockey and countless other sports will
follow shortly after and from this
Saturday they'll also be able to enjoy
outdoor pools and water parks and from
Saturday the 25th people will no longer
have to work out in their park or on
their living room floor they'll be able
to get back into their gyms their indoor
swimming pools their leisure centers and
jump on that spin bike or treadmill for
the first time in months now we've made
a number of positive visits to gyms in
recent weeks and of course we'd hope to
do this sooner but we really do have to
face this properly we will be giving
gyms the certainty clarity and time they
need to reopen safely so that the
maximum number can open their doors in
just a two weeks time and again we've
worked intensively with both
professional bodies and the experts to
get us to this point and facilities
we'll have to take a number of measures
to protect their communities that
includes for example using time booking
systems to limit the number of people
using the facility at any one time
reduce class sizes equipment will be
spaced out and there will be enhanced
cleaning throughout as always the public
will need to do their bit and follow the
guidance sensibly and safely all of
these measures we are taking are
conditional and they are reversible and
we will not hesitate to impose lock
downs where there are local spikes as we
saw unless the where things remain
closed and of course in any
the place when that is necessary but the
return of gyms and recreational sport is
a vital part of our battle against
coronavirus we need to get the nation
match fit to defeat this disease and our
fight began with a collective effort and
I really hope it will end with one at
the beginning we all stayed at home to
protect the NHS and save lives now the
British public has a new part to play
it's time to eat out to help out to
enjoy the arts to help out and to work
out to help out it's over to all of you
to help the country recover safely
thank you and with that I will now turn
to the questions so first of all we have
two questions from the public
starting with Stephanie from Birmingham
who's on video what is going to be done
to support the retail sector during this
trying time redundancies are being made
on mass across retail stores and all
helped so far such as the reduction in
vit seems to be aimed at the leisure and
hospitality sector the high street is
struggling and many jobs are at risk
what is the government going to do to
try and turn this around well
Stephanie thank you very much for your
question and you're absolutely right to
highlight the importance of supporting
our retail sector the Chancellor
announced a large number of measures
that will benefit the retail sector in
his statement just yesterday so for
example we would be encouraging people
to get back to work by having the 1,000
pound bonus for businesses that unfurl
owe their staff we're also investing in
trainee ships and apprenticeships and
all of this is about getting the economy
moving and of course when you think of a
measure like the Chancellor announced
yesterday there eat out to help out we
very much hope that when people go to
their local pub or their restaurant to
eat out those offering in the centre of
towns hopefully that will encourage the
football to those areas so we get more
people going to our shops as well and in
addition to that if you look at the
stamp duty cup that he introduced it's
usually the case that as you move home
and we hope dots more people will move
home because
of this stamp duty cut you'll have more
people going to the shops to refurbish
their homes whether that is buying a new
sofa or whether it's buying some new
wallpaper paint all those sort of things
will help kick-start the economy and
generate more jobs which is exactly what
we're about so thank you for that
question Stephanie and now over to
Victoria from either Heath who's written
her question
she's asking with all children being
expected back into school in September
2020 what precautions are going to be
taken with social distancing as you say
children only experience mild symptoms
but as a parent in a household of five
children this is a very worrying time
our tests available to the entire family
if one child has symptoms well Victoria
you're you're absolutely right to have
concerns of course we all have concerns
I have two young children myself one of
whom is back at school the other will be
back in September and you know we all
care about our children who we love so
much we want to do that the best for
them that's why I'm absolutely confident
the Education and Secretary and the
health secretary the Prime Minister
would not have permitted this to happen
were it not safe to do so that's why
we've got very rigorous regimes in
schools so for example in relation to
cleaning in relation to keeping a year
group self-contained in order to
minimize those risks on your point about
testing we have said that anyone who has
symptoms they should immediately call
tests and trace and they'll get that
test straightaway so that is available
to everyone thank you for that question
Victoria now we're going to questions
from the media and we're starting with
Laura Kunz Berg from the BBC Laura you
there I am hopefully you can hear me
thank you very much Secretary of State
and you're announcing a lot of reopening
today but will there be sanctions for a
business or consumers who flout the
rules you've put in place to allow
people to open safely again and if I may
ask you as culture secretary how do you
respond to the BBC's decision to scrap
the feed licence fee for most over 75
given
it was the Conservative government's
decision to put this cost onto the
organization in the first place
well thanks those questions are in terms
of flouting the rules
I've been tremendously heartened by how
the British people have behaved during
this crisis good read British decent
common sense has prevailed throughout
and of course there have been pictures
of occasional breaches but if you look
up and down the country countless pubs
restaurants other venues people are
observing those rules and they're
observing those rules because they know
it's the right thing to do in order to
protect us from this virus of course if
the virus starts to despite gain
LeClair's will have to take a necessary
measure that the British people realize
the risk of that and will be confident
not to do so in respect of the BBC I
very much regret the decision that the
BBC has taken we gave the settlement to
the BBC back in 2015 they said that it
was a good settlement and I regret that
they couldn't find efficiency savings in
order to avoid having to impose the
licence fee on the over 75 s in the way
that they have set out and any
follow-ups there Laura and I just come
back on your first point you said you
hope people will have common sense to
obey the rules but if either businesses
or consumers don't will there be any
sanction for people who ignore the rules
and protential put other people in
danger well as I said in response to the
first answer that yeah our experience so
far has been that that has not been
necessary because that people have
followed those rules but of course in
respect of individuals if they are
there's clear flouting of the rules to
for example in large groups and so on we
have seen that the police have powers to
disperse and in respective businesses we
have the Health and Safety Executive and
others who will uphold relevant
standards and now over to sand coats
from Sky News Thank You Secretary of
State um to go back to Jim's and nail
bars people need confidence now Jeremy
Hunt and William Hague both today said
that there needed to be proper mass
testing and this is the crucial bit
including people without symptoms to
keep the virus in check now is there
even a government goal at the moment and
how long will that take and one one
other thing is going these
investigations
they revealed that during April test
data was being collected on handwritten
bits of paper with ministers calling
round looking at Excel spreadsheets
themselves did you prioritize hitting an
artificial deadline overdoing things
properly and safely well first of all in
respect of tests we continue to
massively ramp up the number of tests
available I think the latest figures
shows about 300,000 tests are available
we've already introduced the ability to
have to call this a phone line in order
to get a test throughout all of this we
have ramped up the numbers we've ramped
up the testing and tracing capacity
that's why we've introduced tests and
traces we've got over 27,000 of those
and they are identifying contacts of
people who have tested positive and they
are requiring them to isolate so that's
tens of thousands of people who have
been in contact with people who've
tested positive and ourself isolating
and stopping the spread of the disease
we can get this stage that is the
appropriate way to proceed in respect of
your your comments on handwritten notes
scrabbling around
I really don't recognise any of that
throughout this crisis we have taken on
challenge after challenge and we have
dealt with it so for example we created
the Nightingale hospitals at record
speed we've set up the track and trace
system we've rolled out massive amounts
of protective equipment over 2 billion
pieces and far higher numbers on on
order as well so that that's the basis
on which we've we've proceeded but any
any other follow-ups and so just to be
crystal clear on the answer to the first
question you're saying no there is no
plan to move to a system of mass a
symptom it's asymptomatic testing we're
not going to proceed with that you think
the other measures are enough at the
moment well of course the these are
matters for the the Prime Minister and
the health secretary but the point I
made in respective of all of them is
that we have an effective regime and
we've had have an effective regime for a
number of reasons first of all we have
massively ramped up the the testing
capacity of the back of that testing we
are ramping up the amount of trace
of the back of that tracing we are
ramping up massive numbers of people who
are self isolating reducing the
transmission risk and the result of all
of that you see day-in day-out from a
rolling average basis we are continuing
to keep this disease under control and
in areas where there is a local spike
for example in in Leicester we have
imposed lock downs this is a process
that is working to control the disease
and I think it's the right way to
proceed now thanks for that those
question Sam over to Dan Huot at ITV
good afternoon to truth state and you've
always said as a government you are led
by the science so can you tell us how
the decisions you've come to today are
still based on the science rather than
just the very pressing needs of the
economy and a second if I may what data
have you seen since Saturday since the
reopening of pubs and hairdressers and
and restaurants etc to inform you
suggest that it's safe to open up gyms
etc in the coming weeks well thanks for
both of those questions yes of course we
continue to be informed by the science
and this afternoon I had a further
extensive conversations with the chief
medical officer Chris witty in terms of
how that is then affected the measures
we've taken and you'll see this in the
guidelines that we publish in respect of
gyms but that has for example led us to
advice to reduce class sizes there's a
particular transmission risks around the
equipment so making sure that equipment
is cleaned properly we need to ensure
social distancing and we need to take
steps to improve ventilation all of that
has been guided by the science in terms
of the timings of this clearly we have a
rolling programme of reopening and as
those that reopening continues we
continue to analyze the evidence and the
data from it and of course that is one
of the reasons why we are waiting a
little bit longer in respect of the
the steps in respect of gyms because we
want this path to continue downwards
because the lower the instance in the
community-at-large
essentially the more risks you can take
the more you can start to open up
because the lower the numbers are in the
community at large and all of that is
informed by the science but any any
further on the data are you confident
that the data you've seen so far
suggests that this is safe to do what
you're doing today
I mean how much data could you have seen
because speaking to a cult of scientists
today is some on this on sage suggests
that actually it might take a couple of
weeks at least to see the data from last
weekend to suggest you can make a new
raft of changes yes of course I mean all
the data is continuing to to move in the
right direction so prior to the fourth
of July we had we announced a number of
easements we haven't seen as a result of
those easements that the number is
increasing in fact it continues to
decline and of course we will continue
to monitor the situation to ensure it
continues to decline but we are
confident enough that as we continue on
this trajectory that by the 25th of July
we'll be in a situation where we can
reopen gyms and other facilities in that
way this is we've always proceeded in a
careful and cautious way and of course
through all of this if there is any
evidence that of measures of incidents
increasing things going in the wrong
direction we won't hesitate to to take
steps and the health secretary has set
out a sort of escalation path for that
that the sort of endpoint of which is a
local lockdown if necessary so thanks
very much for those questions now I
think we're on to make a hole for the
Express macer good afternoon of state
thank you very much as people go back to
the pools delicious centers in the gyms
they're going to find there are a lot
more rules and regulations to worry
about for example in swimming pools
there's no butterfly stroke there's no
overtaking people are supposed to pop in
their trunk before they go to the pool
how are you going to persuade the
doubters the
Sport and leisure isn't about to be a
lot more hassle and a lot less fun than
it used to be and if I could just press
you as well on the issue of TV licences
for the over 75 I mean this is really
punishing a part of the community that
have faced the isolation and lonliness
through shielding during this crisis as
culture secretary can't you force the
BBC to cop up with this benefit as the
Prime Minister and repeatedly said and
if they won't isn't it perhaps time to
get rid of the BBC licence fee lots of
lots of questions there to cover a visit
I think in respect to the experience of
swimming pools or indeed all of the rest
of the areas we've reopened I'd love us
to be in the situation where pubs were
as we we know and love them where you
can crowd around the bars and you know
people can shout and all those other
things the judgement we've taken with
this and with swimming pools and
elsewhere is that it's better to reopen
with those restrictions and not reopen
at all of course it's going to take a
while for people's confidence to build
it's rarely the case that you pull up
the shutter and everyone comes rushing
in but equally the experience in the UK
and elsewhere is that over time people
have gained confidence and have started
to engage more but that's one of the
reasons why the Chancellor announced
this whole suite of measures to
stimulate people to go out whether it's
they eat out to restart the economy or
whether it's in relation to the the VAT
cuts in relation to the over 75 the
government has been clear all along that
this was a good settle and the BBC
themselves described it as a good
settlement and we very much regret the
fact that they have not kept over 75
licences free in terms of further
measures that we're taking we're already
D credi consulting on decriminalizing
the licence fee and of course decisions
like this will have an impact on that
and we'll be announcing the outcome of
that consultation over the course of the
summer in respect of the the the licence
fee model as a whole that the Charter
Review Pro the Charter set it out to
2027 but of course all these factors
will be considered as part of looking at
the way forward I think for the
see there are there are lots of
challenges I've already said the
challenge of ensuring impartiality
challenge of respecting all parts of the
United Kingdom and the challenge of how
the BBC adapts what is essentially a
linear model - but all this sort of
on-demand services that any follow-up
may sir
well just on the license be your party's
election manifesto last year's trumpeted
the value of the free license paper
people ocean aged over 75 on people
gonna feel let down that it's being got
rid also quickly after the election
well III fill that down that the the BBC
haven't funded this I'm sure people off
and down the country will feel a letdown
that they they haven't funded it
yeah manifest they said that we thought
that they they they should fund it I've
made that position clear to the BBC and
I've I've not changed my mind on that
and so thanks for those questions and
may sir over to Charlie Cooper at
Politico hello thanks for having me a
lot of people are gonna be really
pleased to hear that Jim's and
legislators in other places are now
reopening as well government advise is
that face coverings should be worn in
enclosed spaces where you're likely to
come into contact with people that that
you don't know does that mean Jim's and
are you are you yet wearing a face
covering when when you go to the shops
for instance well actually I went on the
face coverings actually went to the
Royal Academy this morning and I wore a
face covering for that in line with the
guidance that they've issued in
respective gyms we've announced a whole
series of mitigation measures that we
would expect gyms to take the either
I've outlined some of those as a lot
more extensive measures set out in the
the notice that we'll issue we have not
taken the decision to require the
wearing of face masks in respect of gyms
and any any follow-ups there yeah -
Chris witty that chief Barry Clough said
today do you get a sense from speaking
to him that at some point the UK is
going to have to make
it mandatory to wear a face covering in
those enclosed spaces that I mentioned
like shoppes and potentially like like
gyms going forward do you think it's a
good thing for the ministers like
yourself to set an example by wearing
them in public like you say you how to
ensure should the Prime Minister be be
seen wearing his face covering well I
think the approach we've taken to face
coverings which is endorsed by the our
scientific advisors is its context
specific so for example when I was
wearing it the institution had decided
to require people to wear them and I
abided by those rules and I'm sure
anyone visiting would abide by those
rules
similarly rule the similar rules apply
on public transport and I think that's
the the right way to do it to have a
proportionate approach whereby that
wearing masks is one way of mitigating
risk but it sits alongside a whole suite
of other things the the most important
of which are wash your hands socially
distance as appropriate so that's 2
meters or a meter width with appropriate
mitigation measures and of course if
you're symptomatic in any way
immediately to call the relevant a
hotline and I think that's that's the
approach we're taking so thanks for
those questions finally we're on to
Daniel Bin's
from the Metro Daniel hi there the
government is still advising people to
avoid using public transport unless
their journey is essential in light of
our lockdown measures being eased why
hasn't the advice changed and how does
the government expect people who do not
have cars to get about if the government
believes it's safe for people to go to
the pub gyms and swimming pools isn't it
also safe to get on a train I was at
thank you for those questions but this
is one of the reasons why we've had such
an intense drive on things like cycling
walking other forms of exercise where
people can can do it but we have said
all the way through that if there isn't
another alternative then you should use
a public transport wearing a mask and
taking the other mitigating measures as
necessary and I think that's that's the
right way to go bat is also worth
bearing
mind that of course in London lots of
people use public transport as you get
outside of London and the big cities the
vast majority of people use cars and and
continue to to do so in any follow ups
well I mean train companies insists
they've introduced social distancing
measures very sizing measures so why are
they any different from pubs or other
places of you know having the lock down
relaxed well the the position in
respective pubs and indeed in respective
public transport trains is that you
should you should socially distance in
respect to them so they're they're both
subject to that in all of this and this
is the important point to get across
with all that that through throughout
the reopening we are seeking to minimize
risk do so in a safe way and open up as
much as we possibly can so we are saying
to people it's better to go to walk or
to cycle indeed it's very good for your
public health and now you can go to the
gym as well but if you're not able to do
those things you're not able to use
public private transport cars then you
can use public transport
that's just essentially a way of
minimizing risks of transmission it's
what we're doing across a different
sense of course as the numbers continue
to to fall we keep all of these things
are under review and I've just announced
a whole suite of further measures that
we are taking and we will take further
measures if it is safe to do so
throughout all of this the clear
objective of the government my clear
objective in respective sectors of which
I'm responsible as Secretary of State is
to get us back to them opening up as
soon as possible to get back to as close
to normal life as soon as possible but
only if it is safe to do so and that's
what we have in these announcements
today so thank you for those questions
and with that we conclude this
afternoon's press conference thank you
very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News